In this lecture, you'll learn about VLAN access ports and how to configure them. So our access ports are
configured on switch interfaces where end hosts are plugged in, and access ports are configured with one
specific VLAN.
For example, we've got an Engineering PC,
it gets plugged into the switch on that port,
we configure it as an access port in the Engineering VLAN. The configuration is all on the switch.
The end host is not VLAN aware,
it doesn't even know that the VLAN exists.
The end hosts doesn't need to know anything about VLANs. Switches only allow traffic within the same
VLAN.
That's a benefit we get from configuring VLANs, they segment our campus LAN into smaller broadcast
domains.
So, we are going to have an Engineering VLAN and a Sales VLAN
in the example here. All my Engineering PCs and the router interface and the Engineering IP subnet
go into the Engineering VLAN, and all of my Sales PCs and the router interface for the Sales subnet
go into the Sales VLAN.
Whenever I send unicast traffic within the same IP subnet, for example, from Sales PC2 to Sales
PC1, the traffic comes into the switch, and the switch
already knows the MAC address of Sales PC1 in this example. It just sends it out that one port.
Now, if we misconfigured our VLANs, for example, Sales PC1,
if we put that in the Engineering VLAN by accident, instead of the Sales VLAN, then our Sales PCs
are not going to be able to talk to it anymore.
Well, nobody's going to be able to talk to it anymore.
So that the Sales PC2 send some traffic with a destination IP address of 10.10.20.11,
well, the switch does not forward traffic between different VLANs. That would have to go via a router,
so the traffic is not going to make it to Sales PC1.
So, you need to be careful when you're configuring VLANs.
Traffic or hosts which are in the same IP subnet should be in the same VLAN.
Hosts which are in a different IP subnet should also be in the same VLAN, but that's a different VLAN.
So Engineering goes into the Engineering VLAN,
Sales PCs go into the Sales VLAN.
The default VLAN is VLAN 1.
So by default, all ports on a switch are in VLAN 1, and until you manually configure VLANs,
your campus LAN is going to be one big broadcast
domain. We don't want that.
It's bad for performance and for security,
so we are going to configure specific VLANs. The command to do that, using our same example again,
so if we look at the topology, then our Engineering PCs are on interfaces FastEthernet0/3,
fastEthernet0/4, and fastEthernet0/5, and fastEthernet0/6.
We also need to put the port on the router into that VLAN as well for the VLAN subnet, so fastEthernet 0/1
is also going to go into the Engineering VLAN. Interfaces fastEthernet0/2, fastEthernet0/6,
and fastEthernet0/7 are going to go into the Sales VLAN.
So looking at the configuration, we'll do the Engineering VLAN first.
First off, we have to create the VLAN. To do that,
the command is simply 'vlan' and then the number you want to use for this VLAN, at global config.
So we say, 'vlan 10', that gets us into the VLAN sub configuration.
Optionally, you can give it a name.
It's a good idea to give it a logical name. Here, we've called it Eng.
Next, we need to configure our switch ports as access ports in the correct VLAN.
So we say 'interface FastEthernet0/1', 'switchport mode access' to make it an access port, and
'switch port access vlan 10'.
If you're wondering about the other type of ports we can have, we can have trunk ports as well.
We'll cover that in the next lecture.
We also need to put interfaces FastEthernet0/3 to FastEthernet0/5 into the VLAN as well.
Rather than having to do these commands over and over again
for each individual port, we can configure a range of ports.
So we say 'interface range FastEthernet0/3 - 5',
and you have to do it in this exact format here.
If you try to say 'interface range fastEthernet0/3 - 0/5',
it will give you an error message.
This is the correct syntax to use to specify a range of interfaces. We then say 'switchport mode access'
again and 'switchport access vlan 10'.
So that's our Engineering VLAN completed.
We also need to do the the Sales VLAN as well.
So we say, 'vlan 20' is the number we're going to use for this example. For Sales, 'name Sales' and then
'interface FastEthernet 0/2', 'switchport mode access', 'switchport access vlan 20',
and 'interface range FastEthernet 0/6 - 7'. Again,
'switchport mode access', and 'switchport access vlan 20'.
So, that's how you configure them. To verify, best command is 'show vlan brief'. That shows all of the VLANs
that are available on the switch and it also shows you which ports are in which VLAN. So you can see we just
did the configuration, so interfaces fastEthernet0/1, 0/3, 0/4, 0/5 are in the Eng VLAN 10,
and fastEthernet0/2, 0/6, and 0/7 are in the Sales VLAN 20. All with the other physical ports are in the default
VLAN 1.
So that shows you global information about all your VLANs and all of your ports.
If you want to see information specific to an individual port, you can say 'show interface fastEthernet0/1' for example,
and then put 'switchport' at the end.
In the example here, you can see that it's an access port in VLAN 10, which is the Engineering VLAN.
Okay, so that's how we do the configuration for our access ports.
In the next lecture, I'll show you with a lab demo.